http://www.joabj.com/Writing/Tech/History/1812-Mumford-Human_Machine.html

Democratic and Authoritarian Technologies: A cultural split between the neolithic communities and the first stirrings of the industrial era led to a bifurcation of technology, philosopher Lewis Mumford noted. The neolithic ran by individual craftwork, by folks who bartered with one another in small communities. Innovation crept in "without disrupting the ancestral patterns," Mumford wrote.

The authoritarian technologies, on the other hand, demanded a high degree of mechanical efficiency, at a human cost. These technologies were born from copper, bronze, and iron. In return, their efficiencies could provide a surplus of returns, which kings can then dispense as they see fit. And unlike more democratic technologies, centrally-run coordinated ops were not at mercy of local conditions, or (in theory) incompetent operators.

An increased production of iron "made it cheaper to equip armies and tempted rulers to embark on more extensive conquests," Mumford wrote. The Iron Age, he asserted, "sings the praise not of love but of pillage ... From it comes blood, from it slaughter, and death crawls nearer," echoing the words of elegy scribe Albius Tibullus.

The prevalence in iron in the first century seemed to lead to a slackening of other, perhaps more democratic, technologies.	Creative slacking also appeared during times of war, as the chances for passing a craft from one to another had diminished.

"Both kinds of technics had their virtues and their disadvantages," Mumford concluded. "Ideally, each mode had something to give to the other: but neither established for long any effective cooperation."

Rise of the Human Machine
Long before humans created machines they learned how to make machines from themselves.

The neolithic era was one of small, agriculturally-minded democratic communities, where technology was driven by utility to the craftsperson. These communities didn't have much need for weapons, archaeological digs suggest, though pots and tools were routinely used.

Certain projects had to be done that couldn’t be done by the villages themselves, however, they required a larger organizing entity. This was born the need for the king. The king used a combination of secret scientific know-how, an enforcing bureaucracy, and perhaps an endorsement from the local deity. The Great Pyramid, 481.5 feet tall, was built this way, with a precision rivaling the finest watchmakers, so argued philosopher Lewis Mumford in his 1966 book, "Technics and Human Development."

"It was the king alone who had the godlike power of turning men into mechanical objects and assembling these objects in a machine," Mumford wrote*.

The king’s organization, however, came not without a fair amount of human suffering and alienation, as you might guess. "Only those who ere sufficiently docile to endure this regimen -- or sufficiently infantile to enjoy it -- at every stage from command to execution could become efficient units in the human machine," Mumford wrote*.


The idea of kingship itself must have mutated into being “at the point where the paleolithic hunting chief, the first among equals, passes over into the powerful king, who takes to his own person all the powers and prerogatives of the community,” Mumford writes.

“It is hunting that cultivates the initiative, the self-confidence, The ruthlessness that kings must exercise to achieve and retain command; and it was the hunter’s weapons that backed up his commands.”

 Democratic Technologies and Authoritarian Technologies
The king, in effect, took over the power of the neolithic, agriculturally-focused communities, sharpening its focus, reaping the seasonal windfalls, and in turn possessing a sway that the community leaders did not. The king could appeal to the God, who lent him (or her) the imprimatur of the Divine Rule of Kings. Kingship turned power into an abstraction, something that became an end in itself.

Coercion also helped. The time period around the beginning kingship in Egypt coincides, Mumford pointed out, with mass graves filled with cracked skulls. "Brutal compulsion was the necessary accompaniment of the large-scale organization and the extensive order introduced by kingship," Mumford wrote.

And this concentration of power brought about the ability for the society to pull off larger projects as a whole. For instance, irrigation jobs to bring more water into the valleys would require a coordinated effort among villages. Repairing flood damage and storing food for the winter time were also both better done through larger, more-coordinated efforts. Preparing for a war against the neighbors. The Great Pyramid would have required the equivalent at least 2,500 horsepower to move the boulders in place, their joints no more than one ten-thousandth of an inch thick.

“During such crises there was need for an unchallengeable authority that could marshal the manpower of many communities and ration their resources equitably,” Mumford wrote. If the ruler was successful in his effort, the glory, and resulting institutional power, would accrue to him.

Even if the need for these giant projects were invented, they would still play a societal role. Wars with other emerging nation-states, for example. "War was probably the byproduct of a religious ritual whose vital importance to the community far outweighed those mundane gains in territory or booty or slaves," Mumford wrote.* In fact, it must have been obvious to even a half witted king that what expropriation the troops brought back, was, but, over time, meager compared to the regular taxing of the populace.

Or the building of the pyramids, for that matter. John Maynard Keynes posited that pyramid building was "a necessary device for coping with the surplus labor in an affluent society whose rulers are averse to social justice and economic equalization," Mumford wrote.

 Democratic Technologies and Authoritarian Technologies
In any case, the human machine was the first one to be be, in theory infinitely scalable. "There was no theoretic limit to the number of hands it might control or the power it might exert," Mumford wrote.

This regimentation must have had a negative effect on societies as a whole. Only a select few, the kings and the barons, reaped the benefits from the work of the many. In the process, the laborers' autonomy, creativity, and self-regulation withered. "Each standardized component, below the top level of command, was only part of a man, condemned to work at only part of a job and live only part of a life."* Division of labor fractures individual wholeness, it turns out. Protesting would have been difficult, given the difficulty of identifying the mechanical forces at work that kept everyone in place.

And this human machine, or the power and technology accrued to it, could take a dark turn as well. Mumford grimly notes, that from gunpowder to nuclear warheads, "every increase of effective power, extravagantly sadistic and murderous impulses erupted of the unconsciousness."* This has held true throughout all of mankind, as paranoia and "tribal delusions of grandeur" have led to "murderous hatreds, and atrociously inhumane acts."

It would appear humankind was capable of both organized labor and organized self destruction, with both driven by the same primal forces and mechanical methods of execution.


Other Notes and Quotes
“Under the protective symbol of his god, housed in a massive temple, the king, who likewise served as high priest, exercised powers that no hunting chief would have dared to claim merely as leader of his band.”

Advance of civilization required both the neolithic habits of persistence and orderly drill, as well as the hunter’s “fitful spurts of energy” and acceptance of uncertain rewards.

“In ancient times war was frequently suspended by common consent till the harvest was gathered.”

“Should we be surprised, then, to find that the period of political unification of the Upper and Lower Nile Valley, which marks the beginnings of kingship in Egypt, coincides with mass graves in which are found an unusual quantity of cracked skulls.”

 Democratic Technologies and Authoritarian Technologies
“But in the end the sky gods prevailed. The phenomena of the sky, measured with increasing care and exactitude, gave the assurance of an orderly world, part of which at least was lifted above primal chaos or human caprice.”

“The problems of regulating river flow and repairing flood damage, of apportioning water to irrigation, of storing sufficient food annually to avert famine before the next crop could be gathered—all these proved increasingly beyond the competence of any local community.”

“When kingship replaces the powers of the agricultural communes, their local functions were taken over on a grand scale by the central authority, in either the temple or the palace.”

“Brutal compulsion was the necessary accompaniment of the large-scale organization and the extensive order introduced by kingship.”

“The current separation of art and technics ... is a modern solecism.”

“Even the most cursory historic survey of the arts reveals a fertility of invention in design unsurpassed by any utilitarian equivalent in engineering until the 19th century.”

"The earliest uses of writing were not to convey ideas, religious or otherwise, but to keep temple records of grain, cattle, pottery, fabricated goods, stored and disbursed."

"Secret knowledge is the key to any system of total control."

"From the standpoint of human life, indeed of all organic existence, this assertion of absolute power was a confession of psychological immaturity--a radical failure to understand the natural processes of birth and growth, of maturation and death."

"Each new monarch in the Pyramid Age built a new capital for use in his own lifetime,"

"According to Akkadian and Babylonian scriptures, the gods created men in order to free themselves from the hard necessity of work. Hence, as in so many other places, the gods prefigured in fantasy what kings actually did."

"...Those who would reduce technics to the conquest of time and space and energy."

"This was not merely a revolt against the system of regimentation that had elevated the ambitious and ruthless and depressed the cooperative and amiable: It was revolt against all the pomps and vanities of worldly success, against ancient rituals that had become empty."
